Setting up TLS
==============

By default Clusterio will listen for connections over HTTP which is fine
for local networks but over the Internet it should idealy be over HTTPS
as there are some credentials that could be exposed to eavesdroppers.
The recommended setup is to have an ordinary HTTPS server software like
Apache or Nginx to act as a reverse proxy in front of the Clusterio
master server.  The reverse proxy would then be set up with a TLS
certificate from a Certificate Authoritiy like [Let's
Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org).  Alternatively you can have Clusterio
listen for connections over HTTPS directly by providing it with a TLS
certificate and private key.

Note that a TLS certificate signed by a recognized Certificate Authority
in general requires that you own a domain.  See the last section for how
to create and use a self-signed certificate for an IP address if you
don't have a domain.


Using a reverse proxy
---------------------

Configure the proxy to forward requests over HTTP to the port the master
server is listening to so that for example a request to
`https://example.com/instances/` is forwarded to
`http://localhost:8080/instances/`.  It is possible to host the
interface under a sub-path, in that case a request under the sub-path
should be mapped to the master server with the sub-path stripped out.
For example `https://example.com/sub/path/instances/` would be mapped to
`http://localhost:8080/instances`.

Additianlly WebSocket connections to `/api/socket` also needs to be
forwarded.  Typically this requires explicit configuration and support
for forwarding WebSocket connections.  If the interface hosted under a
sub-path the `/api/socket` address is relative to the sub-path and the
sub-path also needs to be stripped out when forwarded.

You can also optionally set the master server to listen only on the
loopback interface to prevent it being directly connected to from the
outside.

    npx clusteriomaster config set master.bind_address 127.0.0.1


### Apache Config

To proxy with Apache make sure that `proxy_module`, `proxy_http_module`
and `proxy_wstunnel_module` is loaded in the config, then add the
following directives to wherever is the approriate place for your
flavour of Apache config organization.

```apache
<Location /sub/path/>
    ProxyPass "http://localhost:8080/"
</location>
<Location /sub/path/api/socket>
    ProxyPass "ws://localhost:8080/api/socket"
</Location>
```

Replace `/sub/path/` with the location on the proxy you want to host the
Clusterio interface under.  If the whole domain is to be dedicated to
the Clusterio interface then `/sub/path/` should be just `/`.  Pay
attention to the use of trailing slashes, as they are important.


Hosting HTTPS directly from Node.js
-----------------------------------

Listening on HTTPS is supported by the Clusterio master server via the
`master.https_port` option provided paths to a certificate file and a
private key file is configured for the `master.tls_certificate` and
`master.tls_private_key` options.  Both of these are expected to be
unencrypted PEM files.


Creating and using a self-signed certificate
--------------------------------------------

Create a self-signed certificate with OpenSSL by running

    openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:2048 -nodes -keyout key.pem -out cert.pem -days 3650 -subj /CN=localhost -addext "subjectAltName=IP:<ip>"

substituting `<ip>` with the IP address the server will be accessed
under, for example `IP:203.0.113.4`.  Multiple addresses can be given by
supplying a comma sepparated list of `IP:address` pairs and DNS names
can also be specified using the `DNS:example.com` format.  You need to
supply every name you want to connect to the server under the
subjectAltName field, for example to connect to the HTTPS port locally
via an address like `https://localhost:4443/` you need to add
`DNS:localhost`.

This creates a private key file named `key.pem` and a public certificate
file named `cert.pem` and these are used for the
`master.tls_certificate` and `master.tls_private_key` config options
respectively on the master server:

    npx clusteriomaster config set master.tls_certificate cert.pem
    npx clusteriomaster config set master.tls_private_key key.pem

Additionally you will need copy the `cert.pem` file to all of the
computers you want to set up as slaves and configure it as the
`slave.tls_ca` option:

    npx clusterioslave config set slave.tls_ca cert.pem

You will also need to copy the `cert.pem` file to all of the computers
you want to remotely manage the cluster via clusterctl and configure it
as `control.tls_ca` option:

    npx clusterioctl control-config set control.tls_ca cert.pem
