Writing Plugins
===============

Plugins for Clusterio are classes written in JavaScript that run under
Node.js.  The plugin classes have pre-defined hooks that are called
during various stages and operations of Clusterio.


Contents
--------

- [Plugin Structure](#plugin-structure)
- [Defining the plugin class](#defining-the-plugin-class)
- [Logging Messages](#logging-messages)
- [Plugin Configuration](#plugin-configuration)
- [Communicating with Factorio](#communicating-with-factorio)
- [Defining Link Messages](#defining-link-messages)
    - [Defining Events](#defining-events)
    - [Defining Requests](#defining-requests)
- [Sending Link Messages](#sending-link-messages)
    - [Handling connection events](#handling-connection-events)
- [Collecting Statistics](#collecting-statistics)
- [Adding Custom Commands to clusterioctl](#adding-custom-commands-to-clusterioctl)


Plugin Structure
----------------

The basic file structure of a plugin is the following.

    plugin_name/
      +- info.js
      +- package.json
      +- master.js
      +- instance.js
      +- control.js
      +- test/
      |  +- plugin.js
      +- module/
         +- module.json
         +- plugin.lua

Clusterio plugins are Node.js packages that can be published on npm for
ease of installation and distribution.  The usual guides for creating
such packages apply.  At minimum the `package.json` file must contain a
version entry.

A possible workflow for developing plugins is to place the plugin in a
sub-directory of where clusterio has been installed, and rely on Node.js
searching up the folder heirarchy for it to find `@clusterio/lib`.  To
add it to `plugin-list.json` so that it gets loaded use the `plugin add
<path>` sub-command to either clusteriomaster, clusterioslave or
clusterioctl.  Note that it's important that the path starts with ./ or
../ (use .\ or ..\ on Windows).

For a plugin the most important file is the `info.js` file.  Without it
the plugin will not recognized by Clusterio.  Here's an example of it:

    const libLink = require("@clusterio/lib/link"); // For messages

    module.exports = {
        name: "foo_frobber",
        title: "Foo Frobber",
        description: "Does advanced frobnication",
        instanceEntrypoint: "instance",
        masterEntrypoint: "master",
        messages: {
            /* See below */
        },
    };

The following properties are recognized:

**name**:
    Internal name of the plugin.  Must be the same as the plugin's
    directory name

**title**:
    Name of the plugin as shown to users.  Currently not used.

**description**:
    Brief description of what the plugin does.  Currently not used.

**instanceEntrypoint**:
    Path to a Node.js module relative to the plugin directory which
    contains the InstancePlugin class definition for this plugin.  This
    is an optional paramater.  A plugin may have code only for instances
    but it must still be loaded on the master in order for it to be
    possible to load it on an instance.

**InstanceConfigGroup**:
    Subclass of `PluginConfigGroup` for defining the per instance
    configuration fields for this plugin.  See [Plugin
    Configuration](#plugin-configuration)

**masterEntrypoint**:
    Path to a Node.js module relative to the plugin directory which
    contains the MasterPlugin class definiton for this plugin.  This is
    an optional parameter.  A plugin can be made that only runs on the
    master server.

**MasterConfigGroup**:
    Subclass of `PluginConfigGroup` for defining the master server
    configuration fields for this plugin.  See [Plugin
    Configuration](#plugin-configuration)

**controlEntrypoint**:
    Path to a Node.js module relative to the plugin directory which
    contains the ControlPlugin class definition for this plugin.  This
    is an optional paramater.  A plugin can be made that only runs on
    the clusterioctl side.

**messages**:
    Object with link messages definitions for this plugin.  See guide
    for [defining link messages](#defining-link-messages) below.

The optional module folder contains a Clusterio module that will be
patched into the save when the plugin is enabled.  See the section on
[Clusterio Modules](developing-for-clusterio.md) in the Developing for
Clusterio document.  The only restriction imposed on modules embedded
into plugins is that they must be named the same as the plugin.

While there is no standard for how to organize a plugin it's recommended
to put the MasterPlugin class definition into master.js and the
InstancePlugin class definition into instance.js.  You can put them into
whatever file you want (even the same one for both).

For both instanceEntrypoint and masterEntrypoint the path should not end
with .js and it should use forward slashes for directory separators if
any.


Defining the plugin class
-------------------------

The plugin class should derive from its respective base class defined in
`lib/plugin`.  For example, to define a MasterPlugin class the following
code can be used:

    const libPlugin = require("@clusterio/lib/plugin");

    class MasterPlugin extends libPlugin.BaseMasterPlugin {
        async init() {
            this.foo = 42;
            await this.startFrobnication();
        }

        // ...
    }

    module.exports = {
        MasterPlugin,
    }

For the instance plugin it's exactly the same except "Master" is
replaced with "Instance", and for the clusterioctl plugin "Control" is
used.  The available hooks that you can override are documented in the
base class [in lib/plugin.js](/packages/lib/plugin.js).

It's best to avoid defining a constructor, but if you insist on defining
one, forward all arguments to the base class.  E.g.:

        constructor(...args) {
            super(...args);

            // Code here
        }

The arguments passed may change, and attempting to modify them will
result in unpredicatable behaviour.  The async init method is always called
immediatly after the constructor, so there's little reason to do this.


Logging Messages
----------------

The base plugin classes provide a winston logger for logging messages to
the shared cluster log.  For instances a copy of the log is also stored
on the slave the instance is on.  To use it, pass a string to one of the
log levels functions, for example:

    async init() {
        this.logger.info("Initializing frobbing");
    }

Metadata covering which plugin and instance (for instance plugin
classes) the log event happened on will automatically be attached to the
log message.

The available levels are fatal, error, warn, audit, info, and verbose.
These levels have roughly the following meanings:

- fatal: Unrecoverable error that prevents continuing execution of
  the Node.js process.  Note that Plugins shouldn't have fatal errors.
- error: An unexpected error condition occured, usually an exception
  thrown when it wasn't expected.  Should be investigated and fixed.
- warn: An potential error was detected, but operation continued
  gracefully.  These may indicate that something is running
  sub-optimally, or is not working as intedend.
- audit: Record of actions performed by users of the cluster.  This
  is usually emitted in response to management requests by a control
  link.
- info: A general log message.  May indicae a status or operation
  completed.  This should not be emitted by periodic tasks that run
  often.
- verbose: A verbose log message which might be useful when
  investigating issues, does not show by default.  Note that logging
  messages is not a cheap operation even when the messages do not show
  up and spammy logging should be avoided for the verbose level.
  If the logs are still valuable in certain cases consider putting them
  behind a config option.

For guarding unexpected errors the best option is to log a short
description along with the`stack` property of the Error:

    try {
        // Operation that should not throw but may end up throwing
    } catch (err) {
        this.logger.error(`Operation failed:\n${err.stack}`);
    )

For plugin hooks expections thrown are automatically catched and logged,
but for event handlers registered on EventEmitters it's critical that
exceptions are catched and handled appropriately.


Defining Configuration
----------------------

Clusterio provides a configuration system that handles storing,
distributing, editing and validating config fields for you.  You can
take advantage of it by subclassing `PluginConfigGroup`, setting the
`groupName` to your plugin name, defining fields on it, finalizing it,
and passing it as either `MasterConfigGroup` or `InstanceConfigGroup` in
the `info.js` export.  For example in info.js:

    const libConfig = require("@clusterio/lib/config");

    class MasterConfigGroup extends libConfig.PluginConfigGroup { }
    MasterConfigGroup.groupName = "foo_frobber";
    MasterConfigGroup.define({
        name: "level",
        description: "Level of frobnication done",
        type: "number",
        initial_value: 2,
    });
    MasterConfigGroup.finalize();

    module.exports = {
        ...
        MasterConfigGroup: MasterConfigGroup,
    };

Code inside the `MasterPlugin` class will then be able to access the
level config field through the `Config` object at `this.master.config`,
for example in the MasterPluginClass:

    async init() {
        let level = this.master.config.get("foo_frobber.level");
        this.logger.info(`I got a frobnication level of ${level}`);
    }

The same applies for instance configs, replace "master" with "instance"
where appropriate.  See [Configuration System](configuration-system.md)
for more details on how this system works.


### Handling Invalid Configuration

If the plugin requires a certain feature to be enabled to function it
should throw an error during init if this is not the case.  The most
common such feature is the save patching, which can be disabled to run
vanilla or scenarios not compatible with Clusterio.  For example:

    async init() {
        if (!this.instance.config.get("factorio.enable_save_patching")) {
            throw new Error("foo_frobber plugin requires save patching.");
        }
    }


Communicating with Factorio
---------------------------

For pushing data into Factorio there's RCON, which lets you send
arbitrary Lua commands to invoke whatever code you want in the game.
This is done by calling the `sendRcon` method on the plugin object.
For example:

    async onStart() {
        let response = await this.sendRcon(
            "/sc rcon.print('data')"
        );

        // Do stuff with response.
    }


Because data into Factorio is streamed at a rate of 3-6 kB/s by default,
it is recommended to avoid sending large commands as much as possible,
and to strip down the data on the ones you send to only what's strictly
necessary.  You can have lua code injected into the game via the module
system and call that from RCON to avoid having to send code through the
commands.

For getting data out from Factorio there's both RCON and the `send_json`
API of the Clusterio module.  Returning data via RCON is prefered if the
action is initiated from the Node.js side.  The `send_json` API allows
sending JSON payloads on channels that plugins can listen to.  From a
plugin you listen for an event named `ipc-channel_name` in order to get
data sent by `send_json`.  For example in the plugin code:

    async init() {
        this.instance.server.on("ipc-my_plugin_foo", content =>
            this.handleFoo(content).catch(err => this.logger.error(
                `Error handling foo:\n${err.stack}`
            ))
        );
    }

    async handleFoo(content) {
        // Do stuff with content
    }

And then in the module for the plugin:

    local clusterio_api = require("modules/clusterio/api")

    -- inside some event handler
    clusterio_api.send_json("my_plugin_foo", { data = 123 })

It's recommended to either use the plugin name as the channel name or to
prefix the channel name with the name of the plugin if you need multiple
channels.  It's also important to catch any errors that might occur as
they will otherwise be propogated to the instance code and kill the
server.

Data out from Factorio does not have the same limits as data into
Factorio, RCON responses can be in 100kB range without causing issues,
and payloads to the `send_json` API can be in the 4MB range provided the
server has a fast enough storage system.

**Note:** both `send_json` and RCON can operate out of order.  For
`send_json` it's possible that payloads greater than 4kB are received
after payloads that were sent at a later point in time.  For RCON,
commands longer than 50 characters may end up being executed after
shorter commands sent after it.


Defining Link Messages
----------------------

You will most likely have to communicate with the master or other
instances in your plugin for it to do anything useful.  For this there's
a WebSocket communication channel established between the slaves and the
master server that plugins can define their own messages to send over
it.  This channel is bi-directional and all messages sent over it are
validated with a JSON schema (see [this guide][guide] for an
introduction to writing JSON schema).

[guide]: https://json-schema.org/learn/getting-started-step-by-step.html

There are currently two kinds of messages that can be defined: events
and requests.  Events are simple one-way notifications that invoke a
handler on the target it's sent to.  Requests are pairs of request and
response messages where the request is sent to the target and the
response is the reply back from the target.  The requests are similar to
HTTP requests, except both parties of a link may initiate one.


### Defining Events

Events are defined as properties of the messages object exported by
`info.js` that map to instances of the `Event` class from `lib/link`.
The name of the property correspond to the handler invoked on the plugin
class.  The Event constructor takes an object of properties that define
the event, for example the following could be defined in `info.js`:

    messages: {
        startFrobnication: new libLink.Event({
            type: "foo_frobber:start_frobnication",
            links: ["master-slave", "slave-instance"],
            forwardTo: "instance",
            eventRequired: ["frobnication_type"],
            eventProperties: {
                "frobnication_type": { type: "string" },
                "urgent": { type: "boolean" },
            },
        }),
    },

This specifies an event that can be sent from the master to a slave,
and from a slave to an instance.  It also specifies that the event must
contain the property `frobnication_type`, with a string value in the
data payload and that it may optionally contain a boolean `urgent`
property.  It will also be forwarded by slaves to a specific instance.

The following properties are recognized by the Event constructor:

#### type

The message type sent over the wire.  This must start with the name of
the plugin followed by colon and and be unique for the plugin.  The type
of the message sent over the socket will have the suffix `_event`
appended to it.

#### links

An array of strings describing which links this event can be sent over.
Direction matters, `"master-slave"` means the event can be sent from the
master to the slave, but can't be sent back the other way, unless
`"slave-master"` is also present in the links array.

The available endpoints are `master`, `slave`, `instance`, and
`control`.  Master talks with slave and control, and slave talks to
instance.  The full chain must be specified as the individual links in
order for a message to travers multiple hops, (i.e., for a message to go
from master to instance it must have both `"master-slave"` and
`"slave-instance"` in the links array).  See `forwardTo` and
`broadcastTo` for ways to forward an event to the next link in a chain.

#### forwardTo

Target to forward an event to.  Can either be `"master"`, to indicate a
slave should forward it to the master server, or `"instance"`, to
indicate it should be forwarded to the instances specified by the
`instance_id` event property.  This works by using a default handler for
the event at the links that forward it.

#### broadcastTo

Target to broadcast this message towards.  A value of "instance" means
the event will be broadcast to all instances downstream of the target
it's sent to, but not back from where it came from. Currently, only
"instance" is supported. This means that sending an event to a slave
that slave except for the instance it came from.  from an instance will
cause it to be broadcast to all instances of

#### eventRequired

By default all properties defined in `eventProperties` are required to
be present in the payload for the event.  This can be overriden by
specifying an array of properties which are required here.  This is
equivalent to using the `required` keyword in JSON schema.

#### eventProperties

Object with properties mapping to a JSON schema of that property that
specifies what's valid to send in the event.  This is equivalent to
using the `properties` keyword in JSON schema, except that the
properties specified are by default required and additional properties
are not allowed.  See [this guide][guide] for an introduction to writing
JSON schemas.

The forwardTo and broadcastTo can be combined such that specifying
`"master"` as the forwardTo value and `"instance"` as the broadcastTo
value will cause the event to be broadcast to all instances in the
cluster.  For this to work, you will need to specify `instance-slave`,
`slave-master`, `master-slave`, and `slave-instance` as the links.

Keep in mind when forwarding events that if the target an event is being
forwarded to is not online, the event will be dropped.  Use a request if
you need a confirmation that the message was received.

### Definining Requests

Requests are defined as properties of the messages object exported by
`info.js` that map to instances of the `Request` class from `lib/link`.
The name of the property corresponds to the handler invoked on the plugin
class.  The Request constructor takes an object of properties that define
the event. For example, the following could be defined in `info.js`:

    messages: {
        reportFrobnication: new libLink.Request({
            type: "foo_frobber:report_frobnication",
            links: ["master-slave", "slave-instance"],
            forwardTo: "instance",
            requestRequired: ["verbosity"],
            requestProperties: {
                "verbosity": { type: "integer" },
                "special": { type: "boolean" },
            },
            responseProperties: {
                "report": {
                    type: "array",
                    items: { type: "string" },
                },
            },
        }),
    },

This specifies a request that can be sent from the master to a slave,
and from a slave to an instance.  The request data must contain the
property `verbosity` with an integer number as the value, as well as the
`instance_id` property (implied by `forwardTo: "instance"`) and it may
also contain a boolean `special` property.  It also defines that the
response sent must contain a `report` property mapping to an array of
strings.  When received by a slave, it will also be forwarded to the
instance specified by `instance_id`.

The following properties are recognized by the Request constructor:

#### type

The message type sent over the wire.  This must start with the name of
the plugin followed by colon and and be unique for the plugin.  The type
of the message sent over the socket will have the suffix `_request`
appended to it for the request and `_response` appended to it for the
response.

#### links

An array of strings describing which links this request can be sent
over.  Direction matters; `"master-slave"` means the request can be sent
from the master to the slave and the slave can reply to the master, but
the slave can't send a request to the master unless `"slave-master"` is
also present in the links array.

The available endpoints are `master`, `slave`, `instance`, and
`control`.  Master talks with slave and control, and slave talks to
instance.  The full chain must be specified as the individual links in
order for a message to travers multiple hops, (i.e., for a message to go
from master to instance it must have both `"master-slave"` and
`"slave-instance"` in the links array).  See `forwardTo` for ways to
forward a request to the next link in a chain.

#### forwardTo

Target to forward the request to.  Can either be `"master"` to indicate
a slave should forward it to the master server when receiving it from an
instance, or `"instance"` to indicate it should be forwarded to the
instances specified by the `instance_id` request property.  This works
by using a default handler for the request by the links that forward it.

#### requestRequired

By default all properties defined in `requestProperties` are required to
be present in the payload for the request.  This can be overriden by
specifying an array of properties which are required here.  This is
equivalent to using the `required` keyword in JSON schema.

#### requestProperties

Object with properties mapping to a JSON schema of that property that
specifies what's valid to send in the request.  This is equivalent to
using the `properties` keyword in JSON schema, except that the
properties specified are by default required and additional properties
are not allowed.  See [this guide][guide] for an introduction to writing
JSON schemas

#### responseRequired

Same as the requestRequired only for the response sent back by the
target.

#### responseProperties

Same as the requestProperties only for the response sent back by the
target.


Sending Link Messages
---------------------

Link messages are sent by calling the `.send()` method on the
Event/Request instance with the link you want to send it over and the
data to send. For `InstancePlugin` code the link to the slave is the
`instance` itself, which is accessible through the `.instance` property
of the `InstancePlugin`. The `.info` property of the plugin class exposes
the data exported from the plugin's `info.js` module.  In other words:

    // In an InstancePlugin class
    async frobnicate() {
        this.info.messages.exampleEvent.send(this.instance, { foo: "bar" });
    }

For the Request class the send method is async and returns the response
data received from the target it was sent to, or throws an error if the
request failed.


### Handling connection events

There are a few connection related events that plugins neeed to repsond
to in order to avoid data loss and connection problems.  The most
important is the prepare disconnect for the link between master and
slave.  This is signaled to `MasterPlugin` classes via the
`onPrepareSlaveDisconnect` hook and to `InstancePlugin` classes via the
`onPrepareMasterDisconnect` hook.

After the prepare disconnect the connection will be closed, which will
result in pending requests and events being dropped.  Plugins must
respond to the prepare disconnect by stopping any processess it does
that send events or requests over the link in question.  This can be
accomplished either through listening for the prepare disconnect hook,
or by checking the `connected` or `closing` property of the connector
for the master/slave connection.  For example the sending of an event
from an `InstancePlugin` class can be stopped while the connection is
closing by using the following code:

    if (!this.slave.connector.closing) {
        this.info.messages.frobnicate.send(this.instance, { foo: "bar" });
    }

If the event or request needs to be sent to the master it can be put
into a queue stored on the plugin instance and sent out when the
connection is established again.  The re-establishement of the
connection is  notified to plugins via the `connect` event to the
`onMasterConnectionEvent` and `onSlaveConnectionEvent` hooks.

The second connection event which is of lesser importance to respond to
is the `drop` connection event served through `onMasterConnectionEvent`
for `InstancePlugin` classes and through `onSlaveConnectionEvent` for
`MasterPlugin` classes.  This is raised when the connection between the
master and slave in question is lost, most likely due to networking
issues.  When in the dropped state the slave will keep trying to
reconnect to the master server in order to re-establish it, and if
successful no events or requests will be lost.  However while in the
dropped state any requests and events sent gets queued up in memory
until the connection is re-established.  This means that if your plugin
sends a lot of events or requests, they can end up being queued up in a
buffer for a long time and sent out all at once.  To avoid this you
should be throtteling and/or stopping your requests/events after `drop`
has been raised, and continue back as normal when `connect` is raised.


Collecting Statistics
---------------------

Clusterio comes with its own Prometheus client implementation, one part
due to Not Invented Here and another part due to collectors in
prom-client being difficult to get to work nicely with collecting data
from plugins optionally loaded at runtime on different computers.

In its simplest form collecting data from plugins consists of defining
the metric and updating it somewhere in the plugin code.  For example:

    const { Counter } = require("@clusterio/lib/prometheus");

    const fooMetric = new Counter(
        "clusterio_foo_frobber_foo_metric", "Measures the level of foo",
    );

    // Somewhere in the master plugin code
    fooMetric.inc();

This works for master plugins, and the metric will be automatically
available through the /metric HTTP endpoint.  It's recommended that
plugin metrics follow `clusterio_<plugin_name>_<metric_name>` as the
naming scheme.

For metrics that are per-instance, you must define an `instance_id` label and
set it accordingly, for example:

    const { Counter } = require("@clusterio/lib/prometheus");

    const barMetric = new Gauge(
        "clusterio_foo_frobber_bar_metric", "Bar instance level",
        { labels: ["instance_id"] }
    );

    // Somewhere in the instance plugin code
    barMetric.labels(String(this.instance.config.get("instance.id"))).set(someValue);

Metrics are automatically registered to the default registry, and this
default registry is automatically polled by the master server on slaves.
This means that it's important that you place the definition of the
metric at module level so that it's not created more than once over the
lifetime of a slave.  Since the metrics remember their values and would
continue to be exported after an instance is shutdown, there's code at
instance shutdown that removes all the values where the `instance_id`
label matches the id of the instance shut down.

For statistics you need to update on collection there's an `onMetrics`
hook on both master and instance plugins that is run before the
metrics in the default registry are collected.


Adding Custom Commands to clusterioctl
--------------------------------------

The control entrypoint for plugins allows you to extend clustectl with
your own commands.  The creation of custom commands typically starts
with defining a command tree for the plugin:

    const { Command, CommandTree } = require("@clusterio/lib/command");
    const fooFrobberCommands = new CommandTree({
        name: "foo-frobber", description: "Foo Frobber Plugin commands"
    });

Then commands are added to the the plugin's command tree:

    const info = require("./info");

    fooFrobberCommands.add(new Command({
        definition: ["frobnicate <type>", "Do frobnications", (yargs) => {
            yargs.positional("level", {
                describe: "type of frobnication", type: "string"
            });
        }],
        handler: async function(args, control) {
            await info.messages.frobnicate.send(control, {
                instance_name: "Console",
                content: args.message,
            });
        },
    }));

For a command the `definition` is the arguments to pass to
[yargs.command](http://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-reference-commandcmd-desc-builder-handler)
(see also
[yargs.positional](http://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-reference-positionalkey-opt)
and
[yargs.options](http://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-reference-optionskey-opt)
for setting up positional and optional arguments to commands).  The
`handler` is an async function that's invoked when the command is
executed and it's passed the parsed command line arguments and a
reference to the `Control` class of clusterioctl.  It's possible to optain
a reference to the plugin class with `control.plugins.get(info.name)`.

Note that messages sent from clusterioctl needs to have
`"control-master"` as a part of the links array for it to be accepted by
the master server, see [Defining Link Messages](#defining-link-messages)
for how to define the messages that can be sent to the master.

To have the command tree become part of clusterioctl it needs to be added
to the rootCommand tree in `addCommands` callback of the Control plugin:

    const libPlugin = require("@clusterio/lib/plugin");

    class ControlPlugin extends libPlugin.BaseControlPlugin {
        async addCommands(rootCommand) {
            rootCommand.add(fooFrobberCommands);
        }
    }

    module.exports = {
        ControlPlugin,
    }
